[Workers] Added a tutorial for storing data with Fauna in tutorials/store-data-with-fauna/index.md (#2646)
cloudflare/cloudflare-docs: products/workers/src/content/tutorials/store-data-with-fauna/index.md

---
updated: 2021-11-04
difficulty: Beginner
content_type: "📝 Tutorial"
pcx-content-type: tutorial
---

import TutorialsBeforeYouStart from "../../_partials/_tutorials-before-you-start.md"

# Create a serverless, globally distributed REST API with Fauna

<TutorialsBeforeYouStart/>

## Overview

In this tutorial you learn how to store and retrieve data in your Cloudflare Workers applications by building a REST API that manages an inventory catalog using [Fauna][fauna] as its data layer.

### Learning goals

* How to store and retrieve data from Fauna in your Workers.
* How to use Wrangler to store secrets securely.

> * How to use [Worktop][worktop]] to add routing to your Workers.

Author: Added to next commit as is.

> Building with Fauna, Workers, and Worktop enables you to create a globally distributed, strongly consistent, fully serverless REST API in a single repository. You can develop and reason about your application as if it were a single, synchronous monolith, while gaining the resilience and reduced latency of a distributed application running at the edge.

Author: Added to next commit as is.

![fauna-cf-workers-diagram](./media/fauna-cf-workers-diagram.jpg)

> Fauna is a document-based database with a flexible schema. Your product documents include the following data:

Author: Added to next commit with minor changes, e.g., "document" -> "documents", future tense to present tense.

*   **title** - A human-friendly string that represents the title or name of a product.
*   **serialNumber** - A machine-friendly string that uniquely identifies the product.
*   **weightLbs** - A floating point number that represents the weight in pounds of the product.
*   **quantity** A non-negative integer that represents how many items of a particular product there are in the inventory.

> Documents are stored in the **Products** [collection][fauna-collections]. Collections in Fauna are simply buckets of documents.

Author: Added to next commit as: "Collections in document databases are groups of related documents."

> For simplicity's sake, the endpoints of your API will be public. For more information on authenticating users to your applications with Fauna, see [Choosing an authentication strategy with Fauna][fauna-choosing-authentication-strategy].

Author: Added to next commit with minor changes, e.g.: future tense -> present, replace semicolon

## Setting up Fauna

### Creating your database

Open the [Fauna dashboard][fauna-dashboard] in your browser and login to your Fauna account. 

> > **Note**: If you do not have a Fauna account, you can [sign up for one][fauna-signup] and deploy this template using the free tier!

Author: Added to next commit as is.

## Managing your inventory with Workers

Generate a new project using the Wrangler [generate][wrangler-generate] command:

```sh
---
header: Create a Workers function
---
$ wrangler generate fauna-workers
$ cd fauna-workers
$ wrangler publish
```

> **Note**: You must publish a version of your project before storing your server secret in the next step.

### Adding your Fauna secret as an environment variable

After creating and deploying your Worker, you can store your Fauna client secret safely in Cloudflare with the following command:

```sh
---
header: Storing your Fauna secret
---
$ wrangler secret put FAUNA_SECRET
```

When prompted, paste the Fauna server secret you obtained earlier.

The **FAUNA_SECRET** environment variable is now injected automatically into your Worker code at runtime.

### Installing dependencies

First, install the Fauna JavaScript driver.

```sh
---
header: Installing the Fauna driver
---
$ npm install faunadb
```

Next, install the [Worktop][worktop] framework for Cloudflare Workers.

```sh
---
header: Installing Worktop
---

> $ npm install worktop@0.6.3

Author: @lukeed I'm happy to make it `worktop@0.7` if you can walk me through the workaround for webpack.

```

Worktop solves common needs such as routing, path parameters, HTTP methods, and more.

### JavaScript utility functions

Create the **utils.js** file in the project folder and paste the following code:

```js
---
header: utils.js
---
export function customFetch(url, params) {
  const signal = params.signal;
  delete params.signal;

  const abortPromise = new Promise((resolve) => {
    if (signal) {
      signal.onabort = resolve
    }
  });

  return Promise.race([abortPromise, fetch(url, params)])
}

export function getFaunaError(error) {

> 

Author: Removed in next commit.

  const { code, description } = error.requestResult.responseContent.errors[0];
  let status;

  switch (code) {
    case 'unauthorized':
    case 'authentication failed':
      status = 401;
      break;
    case 'permission denied':
      status = 403;
      break;
    case 'instance not found':
      status = 404;
      break;
    case 'instance not unique':
    case 'contended transaction':
      status = 409;
      break;
    default:
      status = 500;
  }

  return { code, description, status };
}
```

> The **customFetch()** function is necessary for the Fauna client because the Workers runtime uses a custom version of **fetch**. You can learn more about this in the [Fauna JavaScript driver documentation][fauna-js-docs].

Author: Yeah we've been asking that internally - would like to get this language right (and remove `customFetch` if possible).

> The **customFetch()** function is necessary for the Fauna client because the Workers runtime uses a custom version of **fetch**. You can learn more about this in the [Fauna JavaScript driver documentation][fauna-js-docs].

Author: Made other changes in next commit as is.

> The **getFaunaError()** function extracts the [HTTP response status codes][http-status-codes] and description for the most common errors returned by Fauna.

Author: Added to next commit as is.

### Base inventory logic

> Replace the contents of your **index.js** file with the skeleton of your API:

Author: Added to next commit as is.

```js
---
header: index.js (skeleton)
---
import {Router, listen} from 'worktop';
import faunadb from 'faunadb';
import {customFetch, getFaunaError} from './utils.js';

const router = new Router();

const faunaClient = new faunadb.Client({
  secret: FAUNA_SECRET,
  fetch: customFetch
});

const {Create, Collection, Match, Index, Get, Ref, Paginate, Sum, Delete, Add, Select, Let, Var, Update} = faunadb.query;

router.add('GET', '/', async (request, response) => {
  response.send(200, 'hello world');
});

listen(router.run);
```

Examine the initialization of the Fauna client:

```js
---
header: Instantiating the Fauna client
---
const faunaClient = new faunadb.Client({
  secret: FAUNA_SECRET,
  fetch: customFetch
});
```

The **FAUNA_SECRET** environment variable is injected into your application automatically at runtime. Workers run on a custom JavaScript runtime instead of Node.js, so you do not need to use `process.env` to access your environment variables.

### Creating product documents

> Add your first Worktop route to the **index.js** file. This route accepts POST requests to the **/products** endpoint:

Author: Added to next commit as is.

    response.send(faunaError.status, faunaError);
  }
});
```

This route applies an FQL query written in JavaScript that creates a new document in the **Products** collection:

```js
---
header: Create query in FQL inside JavaScript
---
Create(
  Collection('Products'),
  {
    data: {
      serialNumber,
      title,
      weightLbs,
      quantity: 0
    }
  }
)
```

To see what a document looks like, navigate to the *Shell* tab in the Fauna dashboard and run the following query:

```js
---
header: Create query in pure FQL
---
Create(
  Collection('Products'),
  {
    data: {
      serialNumber: "A48432348",
      title: "Gaming Console",
      weightLbs: 5,
      quantity: 0
    }
  }
)
```

Fauna returns the created document:

```js
---
header: Newly created document
---
{
  ref: Ref(Collection("Products"), "<document_id>"),
  ts: <timestamp>,
  data: {
    serialNumber: "A48432348",
    title: "Gaming Console",
    weightLbs: 5,
    quantity: 0
  }
}

```

*   **ref** - A [reference][fql-reference] to the newly created document.
*   **ts** - The timestamp of the new document creation in microseconds.
*   **data** - The  actual content of the document.

> Examining the route you create, when the query is successful, the **id** of the newly created document is returned in the response body:

Author: Added to next commit as is.

```js
---

> header: Returning the new document id

Reviewer: ```suggestion
header: Returning the new document ID
```

Author: Added to next commit as is.

---
response.send(200, {
  productId: result.ref.id
});
```

> Finally, if Fauna returns any error, an exception will be raised by the client. We'll catch that exception and respond with the result from the **getFaunaError()** utility function:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, if Fauna returns any error, an exception will be raised by the client. We'll catch that exception and respond with the result from the `getFaunaError` utility function:
```

Author: Added with minor changes (1st person to 2nd person, future tense to present tense).

```js
---
header: Handling any errors
---
const faunaError = getFaunaError(error);
response.send(faunaError.status, faunaError);
```

### Retrieving product documents

Next, create a route that reads a single document from the **Products** collection.

> Add the following route to your **index.js** file. This route accepts **GET** requests at the **/products/:productId** endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following route to your `index.js` file. This route accepts `GET` requests at the `/products/:productId` URL endpoint:
```

Author: Added as is in the next commit.

```js
---
header: Retrieving product documents
---
router.add('GET', '/products/:productId', async (request, response) => {
  try {
    const productId = request.params.productId;

    const result = await faunaClient.query(
      Get(Ref(Collection('Products'), productId))
    );

    response.send(200, result);

  } catch (error) {
    const faunaError = getFaunaError(error);
    response.send(faunaError.status, faunaError);
  }
});
```

The FQL query uses the [Get][fql-get] function to retrieve a full document from a document reference:

```js
---
header: Retrieving a document by ID in FQL inside JavaScript
---
Get(Ref(Collection('Products'), productId))
```

If the document exists, return it in the response body:

```js
---
header: Returning the document in the response body
---
response.send(200, result);
```

If not, an error is returned.

### Deleting product documents

> The logic to delete product documents is similar to the logic for retrieving products. Add the following route to your **index.js** file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The logic to delete product documents is similar to the logic for retrieving products. Add the following route to your `index.js` file:
```

Author: Added as is to the next commit.

```js
---
header: Deleting product documents
---
router.add('DELETE', '/products/:productId', async (request, response) => {

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed in next commit.

  try {
    const productId = request.params.productId;

    const result = await faunaClient.query(
      Delete(Ref(Collection('Products'), productId))
    );

    response.send(200, result);

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed in next commit.

  } catch (error) {
    const faunaError = getFaunaError(error);
    response.send(faunaError.status, faunaError);
  }
});
```

The only difference with the previous route is that you use the [Delete][fql-delete] function to delete a document by providing its reference.

When the delete operation is successful, Fauna returns the deleted document and the route forwards the deleted document in the response's body. If not, an error is returned.

## Testing and deploying your Worker

Before deploying your Worker, test it locally by using Wrangler's [dev][wrangler-dev] command:

```js
---
header: Testing your Worker locally
---
wrangler dev
```

Once the development server is up and running, we can start making HTTP requests to our Worker.

First, create a new product:

```console
---
header: Create a new product
---
$ curl \
    --data '{"serialNumber": "H56N33834", "title": "Bluetooth Headphones", "weightLbs": 0.5}' \
    --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
    --request POST \
    http://127.0.0.1:8787/products
```

> You should receive a **200** response similar to the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should receive a `200` response similar to the following output:
```

Author: Added as is to next commit

```json
---
header: Create product response
---
{
  "productId": "<document_id>"
}
```

> > **Note**: Copy and save the *productId* for use in the remaining test queries.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Aside type="note"

Copy the `productId` value for use in the remaining test queries.

</Aside>
```

Author: Added as is to the next commit.

Next, read the document you just created:

> ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

Author: Added as is to the next commit.

---
header: Read a document
---
$ curl \
    --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
    --request GET \
    http://127.0.0.1:8787/products/<document_id>
```

The response should be the new document serialized to JSON:

```json
---
header: Read product response
---
{
  "ref": {"@ref":{"id":"<document_id>","collection":{"@ref":{"id":"Products","collection":{"@ref":{"id":"collections"}}}}}},"ts":1617887459975000,
  "data": {
    "serialNumber": "H56N33834",
    "title": "Bluetooth Headphones",
    "weightLbs":0.5,
    "quantity":0
  }
}
```

> Finally, deploy your Worker using the wrangler [publish][wrangler-publish] command:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, deploy your Worker using the [`wrangler publish`][wrangler-publish] command:
```

Author: Added as is to next commit.

> ```console

Author: Did a find/replace on ```` ```console```` -> ```` ```sh```` throughout the document

---
header: Deploying your Worker
---
$ wrangler publish
```

> This publishes your Worker to Cloudflare and makes it available on your **workers.dev** subdomain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This publishes the Worker to your `*.workers.dev` subdomain.
```

Author: Added to next commit as is.

## Updating inventory quantity

> As a last step, you implement a route to update the quantity of a product in your inventory, which by default is **0**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a last step, you implement a route to update the quantity of a product in your inventory, which `0` by default.
```

Author: Added to next commit with minor modification, e.g. "which _is_ `0`"

This presents a problem though. To calculate the total quantity of a product, you first need to determine how many items there currently are in your inventory. If you solve this in two queries, first reading the quantity and then updating it, the original data might change.

> Instead, you can read and update the quantity of a product in a single FQL transaction. It's important to mention that all FQL queries are in fact transactions. If anything fails, all changes are reverted back thanks to Fauna's ACID properties.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead, Fauna allows you to solve this by reading and updating the quantity of a product in a single FQL transaction. It's important to mention that all FQL queries are, in fact, transactions. If anything fails, all changes are reverted back thanks to Fauna's ACID properties.
```

Author: Added to next commit with minor changes, e.g., "Fauna solves this by..."

> Add the following route to your **index.js** file. This route responds to HTTP **PATCH** requests on the **/products/:productId/add-quantity** endpoint:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Add the following route to your `index.js` file. This route responds to HTTP `PATCH` requests on the `/products/:productId/add-quantity` URL endpoint:
```

Author: Added to next commit as is.

```js
---
header: Updating inventory quantity
---
router.add('PATCH', '/products/:productId/add-quantity', async (request, response) => {

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed in next commit.

  try {
    const productId = request.params.productId;
    const {quantity} = await request.body();

    const result = await faunaClient.query(
      Let(
        {
          productRef: Ref(Collection('Products'), productId),
          productDocument: Get(Var('productRef')),
          currentQuantity: Select(['data', 'quantity'], Var('productDocument'))
        },
        Update(
          Var('productRef'),
          {
            data: {
              quantity: Add(
                Var('currentQuantity'),
                quantity
              )
            }
          }
        )
      )
    );

    response.send(200, result);

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Author: Removed in next commit.

  } catch (error) {
    const faunaError = getFaunaError(error);
    response.send(faunaError.status, faunaError);
  }
});
```

Examine the FQL query in more detail:

```js
---
header: Update query in FQL inside JavaScript
---
Let(
  {
    productRef: Ref(Collection('Products'), productId),
    productDocument: Get(Var('productRef')),
    currentQuantity: Select(['data', 'quantity'], Var('productDocument'))
  },
  Update(
    Var('productRef'),
    {
      data: {
        quantity: Add(
          Var('currentQuantity'),
          quantity
        )
      }
    }
  )
)
```

This query uses the FQL [Let][fql-let] function to set some variables for use later in the query:

*   **productRef** - The **Ref** of the document to update.
*   **productDocument** - The full product document that will be updated.
*   **currentQuantity** - The currently available quantity of the product. You extract the property by using the FQL [Select][fql-select] function.

> You can access the values of variables created by **Let** in any subsequent FQL expressions by using the FQL [Var][fql-var] function.
> 
> After declaring the variables, **Let** accepts an FQL expression as a second parameter. This expression is where you update your document:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can access the values of variables created by `Let` in any subsequent FQL expressions by using the FQL [Var][fql-var] function.

After declaring the variables, `Let` accepts an FQL expression as a second parameter. This expression is where you update your document:
```

Author: Added to next commit as is.

```js
---
header: Updating a product document
---
Update(
  Var('productRef'),
  {
    data: {
      quantity: Add(
        Var('currentQuantity'),
        quantity
      )
    }
  }
)
```

> The FQL [Update][fql-update] function *only* updates the provided properties of a document. In this example, only the **quantity** property is updated.
> 
> Finally, this query calculates the new total quantity by adding the value of **quantity** to **currentQuantity** using the FQL [Add][fql-add] function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The FQL [Update][fql-update] function *only* updates the provided properties of a document. In this example, only the `quantity` property is updated.

Finally, this query calculates the new total quantity by adding the value of `quantity` to `currentQuantity` using the FQL [Add][fql-add] function.
```

Author: Added to next commit as is.

> > **Note**: Even if multiple Workers update this quantity from different parts of the world, Fauna guarantees the consistency of the data across all Fauna regions! [This article][fauna-blog-consistency-without-clocks] explains how Fauna's distributed protocol works without the need for atomic clocks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Aside type="note" header="Consistency guarantees in Fauna">

Even if multiple Workers update this quantity from different parts of the world, Fauna guarantees the consistency of the data across all Fauna regions! [This article][fauna-blog-consistency-without-clocks] explains how Fauna's distributed protocol works without the need for atomic clocks.

</Aside>
```

Author: Added to next commit as is

Test your update route:

> ```console

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```sh
```

Author: Added to next commit as is.

    --request POST \
    http://127.0.0.1:8787/products
```

You should receive a `200` response similar to the following:

```json
---
header: Create product response
---
{
  "productId": "<document_id>"
}
```

<Aside type="note">

Copy the `productId` value for use in the remaining test queries.

</Aside>

Next, read the document you just created:

```sh
---
header: Read a document
---
$ curl \
    --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
    --request GET \
    http://127.0.0.1:8787/products/<document_id>
```

The response should be the new document serialized to JSON:

```json
---
header: Read product response
---
{
  "ref": {"@ref":{"id":"<document_id>","collection":{"@ref":{"id":"Products","collection":{"@ref":{"id":"collections"}}}}}},"ts":1617887459975000,
  "data": {
    "serialNumber": "H56N33834",
    "title": "Bluetooth Headphones",
    "weightLbs":0.5,
    "quantity":0
  }
}
```

Finally, deploy your Worker using the [`wrangler publish`][wrangler-publish] command:

```sh
---
header: Deploying your Worker
---
$ wrangler publish
```

This publishes the Worker to your `*.workers.dev` subdomain.

## Updating inventory quantity

> As a last step, you implement a route to update the quantity of a product in your inventory, which is `0` by default.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As the last step, implement a route to update the quantity of a product in your inventory, which is `0` by default.
```

> This presents a problem though. To calculate the total quantity of a product, you first need to determine how many items there currently are in your inventory. If you solve this in two queries, first reading the quantity and then updating it, the original data might change.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This will present a problem. To calculate the total quantity of a product, you first need to determine how many items there currently are in your inventory. If you solve this in two queries, first reading the quantity and then updating it, the original data might change.
```

---
Let(
  {
    productRef: Ref(Collection('Products'), productId),
    productDocument: Get(Var('productRef')),
    currentQuantity: Select(['data', 'quantity'], Var('productDocument'))
  },
  Update(
    Var('productRef'),
    {
      data: {
        quantity: Add(
          Var('currentQuantity'),
          quantity
        )
      }
    }
  )
)
```

This query uses the FQL [Let][fql-let] function to set some variables for use later in the query:

*   **productRef** - The **Ref** of the document to update.
*   **productDocument** - The full product document that will be updated.
*   **currentQuantity** - The currently available quantity of the product. You extract the property by using the FQL [Select][fql-select] function.

You can access the values of variables created by `Let` in any subsequent FQL expressions by using the FQL [Var][fql-var] function.

After declaring the variables, `Let` accepts an FQL expression as a second parameter. This expression is where you update your document:

```js
---
header: Updating a product document
---
Update(
  Var('productRef'),
  {
    data: {
      quantity: Add(
        Var('currentQuantity'),
        quantity
      )
    }
  }
)
```

> The FQL [Update][fql-update] function *only* updates the provided properties of a document. In this example, only the `quantity` property is updated.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The FQL [Update][fql-update] function only updates the provided properties of a document. In this example, only the `quantity` property is updated.
```

Finally, this query calculates the new total quantity by adding the value of `quantity` to `currentQuantity` using the FQL [Add][fql-add] function.

<Aside type="note" header="Consistency guarantees in Fauna">

> Even if multiple Workers update this quantity from different parts of the world, Fauna guarantees the consistency of the data across all Fauna regions! [This article][fauna-blog-consistency-without-clocks] explains how Fauna's distributed protocol works without the need for atomic clocks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Even if multiple Workers update this quantity from different parts of the world, Fauna guarantees the consistency of the data across all Fauna regions. [This article][fauna-blog-consistency-without-clocks] explains how Fauna's distributed protocol works without the need for atomic clocks.
```

</Aside>

Test your update route:

```sh
---
header: Update product inventory
---
$ curl \
    --data '{"quantity": 5}' \
    --header 'Content-Type: application/json' \
    --request PATCH \
    http://127.0.0.1:8787/products/<document_id>/add-quantity
```

The response should be the entire full updated document with five additional items in the quantity:

```json
---
header: Update product response
---
{
  "ref": {"@ref":{"id":"<document_id>","collection":{"@ref":{"id":"Products","collection":{"@ref":{"id":"collections"}}}}}},
  "ts": 1617890383200000,
  "data": {
    "serialNumber": "H56N33834",
    "title": "Bluetooth Headphones",
    "weightLbs": 0.5,
    "quantity": 5
  }
}
```

> Update your Worker by publishing it to Cloudflare, and you're done!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Update your Worker by publishing it to Cloudflare.
```

        },
        Update(
          Var('productRef'),
          {
            data: {
              quantity: Add(
                Var('currentQuantity'),
                quantity
              )
            }
          }
        )
      )
    );

    response.send(200, result);
  } catch (error) {
    const faunaError = getFaunaError(error);
    response.send(faunaError.status, faunaError);
  }
});

listen(router.run);
```

</details>

### `util.js`

<details>
<summary>Click to expand</summary>

```js
// Copyright Fauna, Inc.
// SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT-0

export function getFaunaError(error) {
  const { code, description } = error.requestResult.responseContent.errors[0];
  let status;

  switch (code) {
    case 'unauthorized':
    case 'authentication failed':
      status = 401;
      break;
    case 'permission denied':
      status = 403;
      break;
    case 'instance not found':
      status = 404;
      break;
    case 'instance not unique':
    case 'contended transaction':
      status = 409;
      break;
    default:
      status = 500;
  }

  return { code, description, status };
}
```

</details>

## Cleaning up

> To remove the resources you create in this tutorial, first delete your Worker from its *Settings* tab in the Cloudflare dashboard:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To remove the resources you create in this tutorial, delete your Worker in the Cloudflare dashboard > **Workers** > **Manage Workers** > **your Worker** > **Settings** > **Delete**:
```

![Delete Worker](./media/delete-worker.png)

Finally, delete your Fauna database from its settings in the Fauna dashboard:

![Delete Database](./media/delete-database.png)

## Next steps

In this tutorial, you learned how to use Fauna with Cloudflare Workers to create a globally distributed, strongly consistent, next-generation serverless REST API that serves data quickly to a worldwide audience.

> To build your own production-ready applications, check out the [Fauna Workers quickstart](https://github.com/fauna-labs/fauna-workers). The quickstart implements suggested practices like a least-privilege security model and business logic encapsulation in user-defined functions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To build your own production-ready applications, refer to the [Fauna Workers quickstart](https://github.com/fauna-labs/fauna-workers). The quickstart implements suggested practices like a least-privilege security model and business logic encapsulation in user-defined functions.
```

The dashboard displays the key's secret. Copy and save this server key to use in a later step.

<Aside type="warning" header="Protect your keys!">

> Server keys can read and write all documents in all collections and can call all [user-defined functions][fauna-udfs] (UDFs). Protect server keys and do not commit them to source control repositories!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Server keys can read and write all documents in all collections and can call all [user-defined functions][fauna-udfs] (UDFs). Protect server keys and do not commit them to source control repositories.
```

}
```

> <Aside type="note"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Aside type="note">
```
